The monthly meeting of the Allegheny County Jail Oversight Board was held on Thursday,  
March 7, 2013, in Conference Room #1 of the Court House, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania at 4:00 p.m. 
 
The following members were present: 
The Honorable Donna Jo McDaniel 
Sheriff William P. Mullen 
Austin Davis representing The Honorable Rich Fitzgerald 
Genie Beckom representing The Honorable Chelsa Wagner 
Joe Catanese representing The Honorable Dr. Charles Martoni 
 
Also present were Warden Orlando Harper, Deputy Warden Monica Long, Major Ron Pofi; Marion 
Damick; Dana Phillips, Doug Williams, Chuck Madarino, Larry Ludwig, Mike Gilmore, Carol Hertz, 
ACCHS and other interested parties. 
 
PUBLIC COMMENT 
 
Mrs. Marion Damick discussed the following: 
 Handouts- League of Women Voters Facts for Citizens 
 An interesting Article on Yoga in Prison and Prison Ashrams 
 NY Times Article Prison and Poverty Trap 
 Post Gazette Article on Recidivism.  Allegheny County is 3rd Ranked in percentage of 
recidivism.  Please consider when looking at reappointments of Community Organization you 
look at the recidivism rate.  The Re-Entry Program, the recidivism rate, upon inquiry was told 
they do not have a record for the Re-Entry Program because they don’t have anything to compare 
it with.  Would be good to get that, as the Program in existence for over 1 year.  Judge 
McDaniel’s discussed variables, for instance, how long do you go out, etc.  The Warden can give 
you an educated guess on what the rates are.  Warden stated that originally the recidivism rate 
was 70%, inmates that participated in the program was reduced to 35%.  Attorney General 
Holder yesterday, acknowledge Allegheny County‘s statistics as a national goal.  It is becoming 
a recognized model and other jurisdictions are reaching out to us to copy our goal.  We have had 
very good pieces of publicity in the last two weeks. 
 Carnegie Library Friends Council – At last Council meeting it was stated that volunteers from 
Carnegie Library are coming to the jail for training, and bringing programs for the inmates.  I 
urge you consider hiring a librarian for the facility for the inmates.  Would you please tell me 
where the deposit facility is for books?  Warden responded that the repository for storing the 
books is held in the basement.  Shelves are being installed and to be completed in each POD 
within two weeks.  Only excepting paperbacks.  Call the jail, and a time can be arranged for 
delivery to the loading dock.  A suggestion was made to go to the universities for assistance.  
Judge McDaniel is already soliciting support.  In addition, include easy readers as it will be a 
benefit for those learning to read. 
 
 
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES 
 
The minutes of February 7, 2013 were motioned by Joe Catanese and seconded by Mr. Davis and 
approved by the members of the Board. 
 
 
  

 
 
PRESIDENT’S REPORT 
 
The President opened with a discussion on the Jail Collaborative, and creating a 3 year strategic plan.  In 
addition, we have applied for a grant from a private foundation that would review of jail processes, what 
we are doing well, what can be done better, and things that are lacking.  So we have two strategic plans 
for the whole jail, especially in dealing with shrinking monies. 
 
 
WARDEN’S REPORT: 
 
Warden introduced the Deputy Warden, Ms. Monica Long. 
 
OLD BUSINESS 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
NEW BUSINESS 
 
 Report on Goodwill Program- Michael Lelt. A number of programs, we are a part of the 
Collaborative and Reentry.  Alternative Housing Sights, referring to Ms. Demick’s question we are tying 
to the KIDs system, which will be able to provide the recidivism rate. 
 
Areas of work: 
 
 Alternative Housing Sights – Probation – 6 transitional units.  4 in community 2 Northside 
Common Ministries. 
 Harbor – 40 units HUD funded program (up to 2 years max.)  Special emphasis on Re-Entry 
participants.  80% of individual are working, which is high.  Transition of first batch to begin 
soon, as they are ready to move on.  Hoping Landlords will lease to individuals themselves once 
out of the program. Participants have been working 28 – 30 hours per week $10 per hour 
average.  It has taken 15 months to prepare first set of individuals to transition out. 
 AFFECT – Federal HHHS Fatherhood Grant.  Grant runs until September 14, 2013.  We are 
running a Parenting Classes for400 people enrolled.  Partnering with Family Services, 
Employment is handled by us, and Parenting Classes, and Family Reconciliation. 
 Employment and Training 
 Pack Construction Training Program for individuals in Second Chance.  5 in, 4 engaged on a 
daily basis.  Only four weeks into it. 
 Goodwill Center – Alternative housing site.  50 beds single for males.  Married Reintegration 
Department with Alternative Housing Site.  We have intensive case management.  Can track for 
up to a year.  We have GED services, basic computer classes in evenings, job search program, 
and professional development during black out.  Partner for Drug and Alcohol and Mental 
Health area is Pyramid Healthcare, Inc.  Care assessment, PCPC, determine level of care.  
Southside outpatient facility receives a mobile assessor within 1 week of assignment to 
Goodwill.  Includes psychiatrist on staff.  What is unique, for folks that need to go to work, there 
is various levels and various times, including morning, afternoon and evening hours. 
 
Next month report will be given on House Arrest 
 
Allegheny County Correctional Health Services Report 
 
Nothing to Report 

 
 
 
 
COMMUNITY CORRECTIONS REPORTS 
 
 House Arrest – Nothing to report 
 The Program for Female Offenders, Inc. – Nothing to report. 
 The Renewal Center – Nothing to report. 
 Goodwill – Nothing to report. 
 
 
ADJOURNMENT 
 
The Board unanimously approved a motion by Sheriff Mullen, duly seconded by Mr. Davis to adjourn.  
The Allegheny County Jail Oversight Committee meeting was adjourned at 4:29 p.m. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Chelsa Wagner 
Secretary