The monthly meeting of the Allegheny County Jail Oversight Board was held on Thursday, February 6, 2014, in Conference Room #1 of the Courthouse in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania at 4:00 p.m.

	

The following members were present:

The Honorable Judge Donna Jo McDaniel

Dr. Claire Walker

The Honorable Chelsa Wagner

The Honorable Sheriff William P. Mullen

Joe Catanese is representing The Honorable John DeFazio, President of Council

Austin Davis representing The Honorable Rich Fitzgerald



Also present were Warden Orlando Harper, Deputy Warden LaToya Warren, Deputy Warden Emerick; Marion Damick; Doug Williams, Chuck Madarino, Larry Ludwig, Mike Gilmore, Carol Hertz, and other interested parties.



PUBLIC COMMENT



Mrs. Marion Damick reminded the Board to look at the following:

Excellent Report on the Inmate Trust Account from the Controller’s Office.  She would like to recommend the board review the report. 

Letters from Inmates 

Pro Se Applications and Courts – Stating he was not permitted to make the application as told to him by his Counselor.  Judge McDaniel stated that was not true.  The Warden will make sure it is corrected.

Newspaper Articles which reflects what might be happening in the Jail.

12-2-13 Jail Inmate Care

12-9-13 – Health care and not getting medication.  Also she received a letter in January about not getting his medication as well.  This has also been brought up in several newspaper articles.

Corizon 

The fact that they are getting paid more than $11million per year, and that they have been in the jail for more than 90 days which is ample time to get up to speed but unfortunately they are not up to speed.

Termination of individuals for Unionizing.  This is not good.

Corizon has established a 2 day period for which the family can come in and bring in meds, glasses and teeth.  The family though needs to be notified of the guidelines prior to coming in to the jail.  Also, let the inmates know the guidelines as well.

Article regarding US Supreme Court.  Cell phone:  Do the police need a warrant before searching through cell phones.  She hopes that the Jail Oversight Board could do something to address this issue or stop it or keep it from happening.

Representative Murphy has put in a bill of changes to the mental health system.  She suggests that we right to find out more about this bill.

Wanted to inform everyone of her Support of the Literacy Program staffed by Carnegie Library who will also train as well.





APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES



The minutes of December 5, 2013 were motioned for approval by Dr. Walker and seconded by Sheriff Mullen and approved by the members of the Board.



PRESIDENT’S REPORT


President McDaniel wanted to welcome Councilman John DeFazio and Judge Joseph Williams as new members of the Jail Oversight Board.



She also had a question regarding the Literacy Program Pilot Program at the Jail.  It states in the report that they did a Pilot Program - is it continuing; and the answer was yes.  Judge McDaniel is concerned that there is a large portion of inmates who are illiterate and won’t admit it.  Maggie of the Literacy Program Presented to the Board and a request for it to be continued after March, 2014.  

	

WARDEN’S REPORT:



Warden Harper informed the Board:



Announced Amelia Beadnell as his new Executive Assistant.  Went over promotions of 4 part time to full time positions, and two retired which will enable us to add to 2 more move from part time to full time positions.

Per Mrs. Damick’s item on the Controller’s Report.  He stated that he welcomes the Controller, and they are dealing with the issues brought to their attention.  We take her recommendations very serious, and have been dealt with.  As far as the Inmate Welfare Fund, a report will not be received from the Auditor until end of March, and will be reported on at that time.

Corizon.  We want to ensure and we are going to ensure that Corizon is providing quality healthcare.  Judge McDaniel has requested that the Warden inform Corizon because of their absence at today’s meeting, that she expects Corizon in my office in the courthouse on Monday at 11:30am.

Warden Harper will make sure that medication guidelines will be provided to family members.  Dr. Walker discussed when the part time officer mention the issues of the diabetes needles, and that there was a staff and safety issue with their types of needles, over the ones used prior by the other provider.  We would like to know the status, as Corizon stated that they will look into it and take care of it.



EXECUTIVE ACTIONS:



Deputy Latoya Warren presented Executive Actions:



Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh:  Literacy Unlocked - $10,230.00.  Moved by Dr. Walker, and second by Austin Davis, and approved by the full board.


Bob Barker Single Blade Razors- $7,000.00.  Dr. Walker asked why this is not a part of the Kit provided, which is a basic Health and Safety issues.  The response was because of Securities Issues and the 2014 Budget had already been adopted, that it needs to be pulled from the Inmate fund.  Warden Harper stated that it will be added to the 2015 Budget.  It was so moved by Dr. Walker, and Second by Sheriff Mullen, and approved by the board.



Deputy Warren reported on the Discharge Center.  Presented a document of services provided, and what they would be able to do with the addition of a part time person on weekends.  Some items will still be lacking because of it being the weekend and no availability of reaching resources.  She discussed concern that new person may not have enough to do as it can be hit or miss on weekends.  One idea was to talk about utilizing an officer as well.  If I do go forward to bring on someone, I will make sure that they also have other duties involving the intake process.  There currently is enough in the budget to add the new position at 20 hours per week.  Recommendation from President McDaniel was to test the position for 6 months, then report back to see if it makes a difference.



REPORT ON CASEWORKERS



Deputy Warden LaToya Warren reported that Staffing Levels:



Bureau of Corrections currently has a workforce of twelve (12) caseworkers and one (1) supervisor. A new employee is slated to begin on February 10th which will bring the caseworker complement to thirteen (13).  There is one Caseworker who is off until further notice.



 

Staffing has increased over the past year as there were only seven (7) in October

2013.

 

Primary Responsibilities:



Complete visits to assigned housing units to address day-to-day concerns of unit staff and inmates, as needed.

Responds to inmate requests either directly received from an inmate or Administration.

Submits parole forms and other documentation to Jail Administration and the Courts as directed.

Resolve conflicts regarding an inmate's charges, sentencing information, and other stipulations/mandates imposed by the Courts.

Works with other County departments and agencies.

Attends trainings as directed.

Participates on committees and workgroups as designated by the Warden or Deputy Wardens. 



Case Load:



Caseworkers carry a caseload ranging from one to four pods.  This is adjusted as needed when staffing levels change. A point in time count of the number of inmates per caseworker for 1-29-14; the average is 195 inmates per caseworker.



Deputy Warden Warren will be working with the Caseworker Supervisor closely.  





OLD BUSINESS



None



NEW BUSINESS


Dr. Walker reported that in the compromise budget passed by both the senate and the house, there are two interesting items – 1. Demonstration projects dealing with children of the incarcerated.  We currently have a leg up on this issue.  There is $2 million in the budget for demonstration projects and $500,000 for a website for Children of the Incarcerated.  These item has many  interesting possibilities.  With the Jail Collaborative, 10 years of working with children of incarcerated, I would like to see the Jail Oversight Board look into it.  President McDaniel suggested that we look into it further, and determine if we should apply.







PRESENTATION BY CORIZON



Corizon was absent from the meeting. 



COMMUNITY CORRECTIONS REPORTS



Female Offenders – Nothing to report.

House Arrest – Nothing to report. – How many dollars were saved this month with your program, 104,625 dollars for month of December, for the year over $1 million dollars saved.

Program for Offenders, Inc. – Nothing to report.

Goodwill – Nothing to report.



Controller Wagner stated that she did have questions for Corizon, and it is our office that handles Payments for Corizon.  With the issues I have heard, we are concerned with distribution of medication and concern in terms of work conditions, and standing in the way of organizing.  I wanted to mention this to the board, and since I was unable to speak with them today, I will craft a letter and cc the board.  Judge McDaniel state she will speak with them on Monday and will explain their responsibility to the board.



ADJOURNMENT



The Board unanimously approved a motion by Sheriff Mullen, duly seconded by Austin Davis to adjourn.  The Allegheny County Jail Oversight Committee meeting was adjourned at 4:49 p.m.



	Respectfully submitted,









	Chelsa Wagner

	Secretary