The Monthly Meeting of the Allegheny County Jail Oversight Board was held on Thursday January 4th 2018 in Conference Room #1 of the Allegheny County Courthouse in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania at 4:00 PM.  

Members Present

Honorable Judge David Cashman

Sherriff William Mullen 

Austin Davis representing County Executive Rich Fitzgerald 

Brad Korinski Representing County Controller Chelsa Wagner

Abass Kamara 



Also attending:  Warden Orlando Harper, Deputy Warden David Zetwo, Ms. Marion Damick of the Pennsylvania Prison Society, and other interested parties.  

Public Comment

Ms. Damick presented the following:

An article in the New York Times about pregnant women in jail that referenced the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette’s recent recommendation that the Jail stop holding pregnant women unless necessary for public safety. 

A letter to the editor about the challenges of babies born to mothers in prison. Changes will only come when the public speaks loudly.  Ms. Damick noted that the Jail currently has nine pregnant inmates. We had 86 for the past year.

Judge Cashman stated that you can’t read those numbers that way because those numbers account for the number of pregnant females who were in the Jail for the month. It is not necessarily a static number. It’s a number that fluctuates. So, although you may see that one month we had five pregnant females and another month we had nine, that does not mean there are nine in the Jail. It means that during that window there were nine pregnant females in there. When you add up the number and you say we had eighty some odd people - we never had that.

Ms. Damick commented that this means that the total though is still 86. No matter when they came in or how long they were in the Jail or whether they were all the Jail at the same time, which they obviously weren’t. But I don’t think you are counting the same pregnant women back. 

Ms. Damick urged that judges should see if there’s some way to can keep pregnant women out of Jail.

Judge Cashman stated that this is a multifaceted problem. First, the courts don’t have the information as to whether or not a female is pregnant or not pregnant at the time that they would address that. Second, that’s an issue to be raised with Judge Manning who does bail. If they would put information out that this is a pregnant female who is having a difficult pregnancy that would be something he would take into consideration when setting the bail. But in terms of all the other judges, they are too far down the pipeline in terms of operating that way. That really would be something that would be addressed to their particular lawyers and not to the judges. Until the judges get that information there is nothing they could do about it.

Ms. Damick inquired if inmates are asked in intake if they are pregnant.

Warden Harper replied that they do ask new inmates whether they are pregnant or not, and they do provide a urinalysis for the individuals to determine whether they are pregnant.  

Warden Harper also reported that every day, Mr. Mistick our Video Arraignment Manager gets a listing of the pregnant inmates and meets with Judge Manning through the video visitation to try to get pregnant inmates out of the Jail. So generally, pregnant inmates only remain in the Jail if their charges are very severe.  

Ms. Damick inquired if Judge Manning knows how many pregnant inmates in total are in the Jail at any given time given that he sees through the video or gets a record that here’s a pregnant person.

Judge Cashman replied that they have a two-way video. The inmate can see us and we can see them. With the clothing that the inmates are wearing, unless they are in the third trimester you aren’t going to know whether they are pregnant or not.  It is very baggy. 

Warden Harper added that the Video Arraignment Manager tries every day to get pregnant inmates out by using the video arraignment process in front Judge Manning to try to get these individuals out. He does not know if Judge Manning knows if they are pregnant. Mr. Mistick every day gets a listing and brings it before Mr. Manning to make the determination whether they can be released. 

Judge Cashman added that he’ll check it out with Judge Manning and report back at the next meeting. 

Ms. Damick thanked Judge Cashman and Warden Harper.  She added that she visited four inmates in the Jail last month with another Pennsylvania Prison Society member. They had a positive experience visiting the Jail. The person who took them around was well acquainted with who they were going to see and made it as easy as possible. They did happen to notice a couple of things though including that it is really going to help that many new Correctional Officers have graduated from their training program. Ms. Damick inquired if they’re going to start work part-time in the Jail.

Warden Harper replied that 19 correctional officers (COs) graduated on December 22. They are already on board as part-time correctional officers in the Jail.

Ms. Damick commented that this is excellent.  They noticed during their visit that there was a CO who had only slept 10 hours in the last three days and was finally leaving. That’s not good for the CO except for getting money. I appreciate that a lot of them need it because it’s not the best pay and maybe they are doing it for extra money. On the other hand, if they are getting too tired, this can be bad for the inmates. When you are too tired you don’t react well, don’t react fast, and it’s a detriment both for the inmate and for the COs. Ms. Damick is concerned that we have healthy good COs. She is very pleased that the 19 new COs are onboard already and will be able to reduce the amount of overtime needed which will be good for the County and good the COs.  

Ms. Damick also commented on how well-kept the Jail is.  In particular, on one of the walls, there was an excellent drawing done by an inmate. This should be commended. It is an excellent idea to have some art classes or things of that sort for inmates or to have a showing of inmate art.  These are positive developments because people that the inspection and accreditation awards that the Jail received recently are very concerned with how the institution looks and how clean it is. And the Jail rated very high in that. Many of the County institutions don’t have the time or interest to do that and we do.

Ms. Damick commented that the elevator in the Jail broke down while during their visit. Usually it’s the elevator that the staff uses. She understands that this is not an unusual occurrence.  Ms. Damick recalled that elevators that did break down took a long time to repair as they said they needed to get the repair parts from France. With a six floor edifice, if you have even one elevator down and everyone has to crowd into the other two then you are in trouble.  Particularly if staff can’t get to where they need to be when they need to be it’s not a good policy and I’m sure the Warden doesn’t like it either when they break down. Ms. Damick would like the County to make sure that the elevators are working properly.



Review of the Minutes for December 7th, 2017 

Mr. Davis made a motion to approve the minutes, Mr. Korinski seconded the motion, and the Board approved the Minutes for December 7th, 2017 with no additions or corrections.



President’s Report

Judge Cashman reported that Jail census numbers are up a little bit from where they were at the end of the year. In November we were about 2,100-2,150. We are now about 2,400, and that’s not unusual. It is people going out and doing their last minute Christmas shoplifting and getting caught, and put into jail. That should weed itself out in the month of January. 

Judge Cashman referenced a surprising article in the New York Times that reported that New York City in 2016 had 290 homicides with a population of 8.5 million people. In 1994, they had 2,250 homicides. They started to talk about what they thought what was the most compelling factor that brought about the reduction including the interaction with the police and the community leaders, and the educational efforts. One key was the fact that they focused on gang members and they focused on getting them off the streets, and taking out the power structure and if you think back on the prosecution in the mid-nineties that’s exactly what happened. They went out and they targeted all the leaders out of all these various gangs and we had a significant drop-off in homicides for a number of years until the replacements came up through the ranks.

For comparison, Judge Cashman looked at some other places and in Chicago which had a population of 2.7 million people there were 650 homicides. Now Chicago had more homicides last year then New York and Los Angeles combined. That 650 is 15 percent decline from the year before. In Los Angeles, with a population of 3.9 million people it had 271 homicides, which I found to be particularly interesting. Then I went to Philadelphia. Everything’s different in Philadelphia. The population of 1.6 million people they had 300 homicides. The Pittsburgh area has a population of 1.2 million people and we had 130 homicides.

Now, all this gets to the point that there are a lot of very violent people in the ACJ. That’s the bulk of the people that are in that Jail that are in on charges. We have the nonmonetary bond system. We tried to process these people. We made a particular emphasis on detainers and making sure we are not detaining people for minuscule offenses. The people who are in the Jail are generally very bad people and they should be there.  Judge Cashman received a call on New Year’s Day about revoking an individual’s bond who attempted to kidnap a woman. They were able to arrest him. They set a bond for him in which one of the conditions was no contact of any type. He’s making phone calls from the Jail where the sign is: “All phone calls made to and from are recorded” to her, and then he is calling his buddies to text her, “When I get out I’m coming after you.” He’s not getting out. The Jail is doing pretty well when you consider types of problems that we have with that the population in there and then you look at some of these other cities and it’s really fairly astounding. 



Warden’s Report

Warden Harper reported that the Jail had a graduated 22 cadets from the Correctional Officer’s Academy. These correctional officers are all on post. 

Deputy Warden’s Report

Chief Deputy Warden David Zetwo presented an expenditure request of up to $7,000 from Inmate General Welfare Fund to purchase clothing for cold weather including sweatshirts, and sweatpants for individuals who are being released back into the community. The request for this clothing would be done through our discharge and release center.

Mr. Davis inquired if a written form was submitted with the request.  

Chief Deputy Warden Zetwo replied that the written report was forthcoming. 

Mr. Davis suggested that the Board consider the expense when it receives the written report. 

Judge Cashman stated that it has historically been a challenge if someone gets arrested on the fourth of July and they don’t make bond and now they want to be put them out on the street for today. They came in with a t-shirt and a pair of shorts that’s not going to cut it. So, it’s designed to make sure that when an inmate leaves the Jail, they have appropriate clothing to go outside.

Mr. Davis stated that the Board can approve the expenditure request now, although they normally approve these requests once they are submitted in writing.

Mr. Korinski stated that, assuming the request is not urgent and that Jail has sufficient inventory for inmates leaving the jail in the immediate future, he would prefer to have the request in writing. 

Warden Harper replied that the sooner the Board can approve this request the sooner we can ensure that all our inmates leaving the Jail are properly clothed. He will provide the Board with written documentation as soon as possible, but he wants to make sure the inmates leaving Jail tomorrow or next week have the clothing they need to leave our Jail. He is not sure about that count right now. 

Mr. Kamara stated that it would be concerning to wait until February to approve such a request.

Mr. Davis made a motion to approve of the expenditure request, Mr. Mullen seconded the motion, and the Board voted unanimously to pass the expenditure request.  

Old Business

No report. 

New Business

No report. 

Allegheny County Jail Medical Services

Ms. Williams reported that they were looking at the census numbers that were done from prescreen and found that just over 22,000 individuals came into the Jail in 2017 and met with the healthcare department. They are proud to serve everybody who comes into the Allegheny County Jail. They are looking forward to this year and the improvements that can be made. 

Community Corrections Reports

Program for Offenders

Mike Gilmore reported that on December 16, 2017, they had their annual Christmas program for residents and their children. There’s a church in Wilkinsburg that for a number of years has been anonymously purchasing gifts for all the residents’ children there. The residents are involved in the planning, decorating, and wrapping gifts and everything. For three or four hours on the 16th residents were able to forget their incarceration, forget their addiction, and forget their other issues, and bond with their children in the context of a holiday party. 

The agency has declared 2018 to be the year of training to our facilities. They hired a director of training last year. The last couple of months she has been busy developing curriculum and developing the right training manuals. It is the Program’s goal that in 2018 all employees will achieve 100% compliance with all training policies.  

Renewal Center

Frank DeClair reported that two Renewal Center staff are traveling to the ACA conference in Orlando Florida for their accreditation.  They have partnered with Adagio Health and on January 24 they will be opening their office in the 2nd Avenue location serving both the men and women of that location for preventative health care and education classes.  

Electronic Monitoring 

Steve Esswein reported that in the last reporting period 739 people were in the program.  131 successfully completed the program while 17 were returned to the ACJ for violations.  

Judge Cashman reported that the Judges will be working to get more people out of the Jail and into the Electronic Monitoring program 

Goodwill 

Gaye Velar reported that last month the center held a Christmas party for residents that was much appreciated.  Residents were able to receive family members with extended visiting hours. 

Adjournment 

Mr. Mullen made a motion to adjourn the meeting, Mr. Kamara seconded the motion, and the Board voted unanimously to adjourn the January 4th 2017 Board meeting.  





Respectfully Submitted, 



Chelsa Wagner

Secretary