The monthly meeting of the Allegheny County Jail Oversight Board was held Thursday, August 
6, 2020 held as a virtual conference at 4:00 P.M. 
 
Members Present  
Honorable Judge Clark 
Honorable Judge Lazzara 
Sheriff William Mullen  
Brad Korinski representing County Controller 
Barbara Parees representing County Executive  
Bethany Hallam At-Large Council 
Gayle Moss 
Abass Kamara  
 
Others in Attendance: 
Warden Harper 
Deputy Warden Williams 
 
Meeting Guidelines —  
1. Everyone in this room will be treated with dignity and respect. No exception. 
2. Everyone will have the opportunity to be heard, within reason. Depending on the number 
of public comments that sign up to speak there may be a time limit imposed. 
3. Profanity and yelling will not be tolerated. Anyone using profanity or anyone who is 
yelling will be removed from this meeting. 
 
 
 
Announcements 
 
1. Public Comments 
 
Judge Clark: 
I’m going to start this meeting today with public comments. We didn’t get as many public 
comments as we have in the past. Many of them were actual comments without question. Some 
of them dealt with the issue of the public comment and some of them dealt with issues that will 
be presented later in the board meeting. The Warden and the Deputy Warden have provided 
answers to the things that they could answer and so I thought I would just begin by reading the 
public comments since there weren’t very many and they would be part of the record.  
 
Question from Margaret M. Martin: 
First, thank you to the Board for the $50 contribution to the inmates' commissary accounts as 
well as the daily free phone call. July's meeting was the first I attended (virtually), and I was 
impressed with the Board itself, the Warden, the Deputy Warden, and the issues discussed. It is 
a relief to know that much needed improvements are planned. I read the PG news article written 
by Ashley Murray regarding the audit on inmate meals, the lack of nutrition, and the disparity 
with regard to those who can or can't afford to order supplemental food. It shouldn't matter why 
an inmate is housed in the jail--every single inmate deserves to have a nutritious and edible 
meal, including fruits and vegetables. The food should be identifiable and palatable. It is 
inhumane and unconscionable that up to this point, this has not been the case. Are the statistics 
on the ACJ website accurate with regard to the number of inmates who currently have, are 
recovered from, or were released due to a COVID-19 infection? Thank you for your time and the 
service you provide for one of our most vulnerable populations. 

 
 
 
 
Warden’s Response: 
We appreciate the feedback and response to recent meetings as well as recent news articles. 
We remain committed to process evaluation and improvement in the facility. The website is 
updated frequently and is current and up to date presently. 
 
Judge Clark: 
As to the nutrition, I did meet with the Warden and Deputy Warden. I meet with them before 
each of the meetings to go over the agenda. I actually talked to them about the issue of 
nutrition. It's something that they're going to look at, I think the contract will be coming up for 
renewal or there will be an RFP process. And there are some other issues regarding why there 
is sort of a high carb. diet. Many of the inmates only choose to eat two meals and they want to 
make sure that they have enough calories. But we're going to look at the issue of including more 
fruits and vegetables. As we know, fresh fruits can be very expensive but we're going to look at 
it as it goes on. It's an issue that we intend to address. It's not going without notice. I am a 
person who is into nutritious meals, so I share some of those concerns as well. 
 
Question from Luiza Sarbu, Pennsylvania Prison Society, Foundation of HOPE: 
Have you considered testing the newly incarcerated for COVID when first coming *into* the jail 
to keep Coronavirus out of the facility? If not, why? In addition, have you considered testing 
inmates as they're *leaving* the facility to prevent the spread of Coronavirus in the community? 
If not, why? 
 
Warden’s Response: 
The ACJ follows the recommendations from the CDC, PA Department of Health and the 
Allegheny Health Department to test symptomatic individuals. We continue to test individuals 
based on clinical recommendations and routinely quarantine other individuals during their first 
14 days and presume that they could be positive or develop symptoms. If someone is a known 
contact exposure, at time of intake, we will test them upon admission. We have not considered 
testing individuals prior to release into the community for a number of reasons to include some 
of the following: 
1. The ACJ follows the recommendations from the CDC, PA Department of Health and the 
Allegheny Health Department to test symptomatic individuals. 
2. When someone is legally released from the facility, we have an obligation to comply with that 
order. Test result times have varied and could require someone to remain incarcerated for 
longer than legally indicated if they are pending their test results. 
3. Individuals have the right to refuse testing. The test is uncomfortable, and the individual has 
the right to refuse the test. 
 
Question from John Doe: 
What can the prison board do to ensure the safety of the staff members at the ACJ? Because 
the jail is so short staffed, staff members are being given assignments that usually would be 
given to 2-3 employees. This is putting the inmates at risk along with the staff. Management is 
creating unsafe situations and the staff and inmates are ultimately paying the price. Two staff 
members were recently fired....both were doing multiple jobs that would not have been expected 
by them if the jail was properly staffed. Investigate the Allegheny County Jail!!! 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Warden’s Response: 
We cannot discuss personnel related matters in public meetings. COVID-19 has required 
additional duties to be added to a number of job classifications, to include providing 
temperature/symptom screening to housing units. 
 
Question from John Doe: 
Inmate care is suffering at the jail. Management, specifically Laura Williams, is doing a great job 
at hiding the fact that the jail is short staffed almost daily. Inmates are not being processed in 
intake in a timely manner because medical is so short staffed. Multiple incident reports have 
been completed about it. Is the prison board going to investigate the ACJ? What is occurring 
behind closed doors is not what is being reported to you by management. If you want the truth, 
investigate the jail. Talk to the staff. Talk to the inmates. 
 
Judge Clark: 
 
So, this is really a question for the board. And we are required to make unannounced visits to 
the jail. I think that's something that the board needs to discuss whether we can do that during 
this pandemic and if so, how we would do it. Especially because they are unannounced visits, 
we would be shifting up to the jail during a pandemic. So, I don't know if it's possible to do that 
during the pandemic? But maybe at some place outside of the meeting, some of you could think 
about it, the board members, could come up with a recommendation that we could maybe 
present at another meeting. But it is something we're required to do. 
 
Question from Asia DeVaughn: 
When will the inmates get the tablets? When will the video Visitation start? Will they inmates get 
more money from the inmate relief fund? 
 
Warden’s Response: 
We are anticipating that the tablet program will be operationalized by the end of 
September/beginning of October. 
 
Judge Clark: 
The Warden is going to give a presentation about that, so you'll hear more about that. 
 
Question from Concerned Public: 
Why does the prison board say if they do not read questions they will be made part of the 
minutes? This in fact is NOT true. There have been questions asked and comments provided 
that have NOT been read or part of the minutes. This is obviously an attempt just look good for 
the public. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Initially with the virtual meeting, I did at the first couple of meetings try to read as many 
questions as I could and at the next meeting provide as many answers and it took a long time. 
Ms. Hallam had the idea of posting them along with the minutes. I did not check to see if they 
were posted. I know that responses were made for every question and so if they have not been 
posted I would just ask that we make sure they are posted. They should go along with the 
minutes. I know the minutes are posted on the website and so the comments to the questions 
should also be posted. If they are not there, I do apologize for that. 
 
 
 

 
 
Question from Pod Officer: 
The recent food service audit does not include the fact that the menu they used to bid in the 
contract isn’t what is provided. They get a straight diet of pasta (Pasta/meat sauce, Baloney 
Robinson) and burgers. Where are the cookies, iced cake, chicken and rice, eggs (scrambled 
and hard boiled) and pancakes? Their menu they submitted is not what’s being provided. I am a 
pod officer and will gladly provide you with a menu of what they are actually serving. 
 
 
Judge Clark: 
We did get a menu I think from the Warden. I don't know whether the board members would like 
to continue to receive copies of the menus to see what's being served. But we can ask if those 
can be provided along with the meeting materials or sent out to the board in advance. 
 
Question from Concerned Medical: 
The ADON job title has a list of very specific duties. There are many shifts where the ADON 
position is not filled and the chief deputy of medical is there in place of the ADON. This isn’t like 
customer service stepping in for a cashier that called off at Target. There are very specific 
duties listed in the job ad that are lacking when the Chief DW fills in. How can a jail continue to 
run short staffed for 8 months now on medical personnel in the throes of a pandemic? 
 
Warden’s Response: 
The primary position functions of an Assistant Director of Nursing are as follows: maintaining 
charge of an assigned shift within the healthcare unit to include scheduling, staffing, 
management, and evaluation of healthcare services staff during the assigned shift. They are 
primarily responsible for coordinating and administering the health-related care of inmates. 
Assistant Directors of Nursing are administrative positions in the healthcare department and 
perform supervisory functions. Frequently, the Assistant Directors of Nursing also work line staff 
positions to support the operations of the healthcare department. The Chief Deputy Warden and 
other Healthcare Managers have always demonstrated willingness to oversee supervisory 
functions to support the Assistant Directors of Nursing and the Healthcare Department. Staffing 
shortages and challenges have been present due to many compounding factors, including staff 
affected by quarantine/isolation of the pandemic. All administrators in the healthcare department 
recognize the importance of patient care and are committed to ensuring the operations of the 
unit 24/7. 
 
Question from Concerned Officer: 
The agreement made with the ACLU states that officers and inmates will be provided with 
surgical, procedural, or N95 masks. How come Officers are not given a mask when entering the 
facility per the agreement? 
 
Warden’s Response: 
Correctional employees were previously provided with masks. In response to feedback from the 
officers and staff, employees expressed interest in being afforded the opportunity to wear 
personal masks. This was honored. When employees are interacting with suspected or positive 
COVID-19 cases, they are provided with the appropriate PPE. 
 
Question from Concerned Officer: 
There was a 1975 lawsuit from inmates against the jail settled in 1978, in a federal court ruling. 
The ruling states the jail must create separate housing for mental health inmates and adequate 
Mental health staffing. So why is the jail housing New court inmates on 5F, a mental health 
overflow unit? It takes away critical beds needed for mental health. And why has their not been 

 
 
a mental health nurse down in intake the last few nights? How are inmates being cleared for 
admission without seeing a verified mental health nurse. 
 
Warden’s Response: 
Quarantine procedures, in response to COVID-19, have required creative and adaptive 
solutions throughout the facility. Mental Health Nurses are not assigned to intake. Mental Health 
Specialists (or those trained to fulfill those duties) are assigned to complete mental health 
screenings in intake. Some of the nurses are qualified to complete mental health screenings 
when there are not available staff otherwise. 
 
Question from Susan Johnson: 
Why aren't all staff in the Jail receiving hazard pay? 
 
Warden’s Response: 
Discussions related to personnel matters or matters subjected to collective bargaining will not 
be discussed. 
 
Question from Natalie Mitchell: 
The jail is at a staffing crisis, and it is not due to Covid-19. The officers are getting forced daily. 
The medical department has had no staff and continues to have no staff. The Deputy warden of 
the medical department, who has no medical background, is running the medical department for 
sometimes 16 hours a day. The jail is running under unsafe staffing levels and administrators, 
which is making for an extremely unsafe work environment, in an already unsafe place, for 
inmates and staff. So I question why the jail administration is worrying about things like the color 
of a mask being worn? How can a color of a mask be offensive? Doesnt it seem that there are 
many more issues related to staffing and inmate and staff safety to focus on in the facility? 
 
Judge Clark: 
There wasn't an answer provided. I think the Warden will talk about some of those things later in 
the meeting. 
 
Question from Joe Otte, Criminal Defense Attorney: 
I have a very high-risk client in the ACJ. I monitor the numbers daily, as a rapid increase would 
almost certainly trigger a change in circumstances that would allow me to again petition for his 
release. The statistics have not been updated since August 1. This is just a small example of 
how the jail has not been providing accurate and timely information during the pandemic. The 
jail should further provide information regarding the origin of positive tests (level AND pod) so 
that we can determine whether our clients are at grave risk. If there is a reason to believe 
specific pods have been exposed, that should also be provided on the county website so that 
we can monitor the numbers. Lastly, despite the best efforts of Bill Mistick and his crew, wait 
times for videoconferencing are still entirely too long. 
 
Judge Clark: 
I actually emailed Attorney Otte because there were some things in his comment that I didn't 
understand. I didn't understand what statistics that he was talking about that weren't updated. 
Whether he was talking about COVID-19 statistics or any other statistics. The COVID-19 
statistics are updated but some of the information that Mr. Otte wants on the website can't be 
put on the website due to confidentiality. The Warden notifies me every time there is a positive 
test of staff or an inmate. Then I notify the board when I receive that information from the 
Warden. And with respect to the video conferencing I was not sure whether he was talking 
about video conferencing for court hearings or video conferencing for him to visit confer with his 

 
 
client. So, I asked him to clarify that, but I also indicated that it’s been challenging because of 
the number of lawyers that need to meet with clients virtually. But, at this present time there is 
always opportunity to meet in person and have a none contact behind the glass meeting with a 
client. 
 
 
 
2. Old Business 
  
Judge Clark: 
We will return to the agenda. We’re going to start with old business. We have the two Sub-
committees. Inmate Welfare Expense Fund Sub-Committee Report, Judge Lazzara is there 
anything you want to report for this meeting? 
 
a. Inmate Welfare Expense Fund Sub-Committee Report 
 
Judge Lazzara:  
I’m sorry. I do not have a report for this meeting. We did not have an opportunity to meet. The 
month of July has been a little bit crazy trying to get things accomplished in the courts. So, I do 
apologize for that. We did receive a letter, dated August 5th, 2020 from Gregory J. Dover on 
behalf of the members and official visitors of the Pennsylvania Prison Society. It is several 
pages, a letter that I think we definitely need to discuss in our sub-committee. I’ll be reaching out 
to my fellow members so that we can hopefully get something scheduled within the next couple 
of weeks. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Thank you. Next, we have the Suicide Prevention Sub-Committee Report. Ms. Parees is there 
anything you’d wish to report today? 
 
b. Suicide Prevention Sub-Committee Report  
 
Barbara Parees: 
You recall at the last meeting that, our sub-committee requested that the Warden would report 
to this board monthly on the progress of the implementation of the recommendations made in 
the NCCAC suicide prevention report. I spoke with the Warden earlier today and he is prepared 
to make that report now, if you would like to entertain that? 
 
Judge Clark: 
Yes. Warden? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Good afternoon everybody. First, I just want to go over what the ACJ has done since the last 
Jail Oversight Board meeting. The first thing that we’ve done was recommendation #3. Lack of 
privacy. A meeting was held with facilities and a walk through of the intake area occurred. 
Options were identified including several that were presented to us by employees working in the 
intake area. The facility staff reached out to a county architect to get additional 
recommendations to improve privacy in our intake department. We will now schedule a meeting 
with the architect to do a walk through with him so that we can find a solution for the privacy in 
our intake area. The second thing that we’ve done. Recommendations #4 and #13. Additional 
training and interpersonal communication skills and specialized training for staff relating to 
suicide prevention and interpersonal communication. A training sub-committee that includes 

 
 
both operations and health care training staff was created. The group met to address the 
advised training needs, new lesson plans for suicide prevention have been drafted, developed, 
and submitted for my review. The current interpersonal communication skills training program 
will be reviewed and revised as needed. Outside resources have been identified and contacted 
to explore the possibility of arranging CIT and mental health first aid training for training, training 
in house for staff at the Allegheny County Jail. The third thing we’ve done is recommendation 
#5. Suicide resistant cells. Facility and jail administration visited the cell on a mental health pod 
to determine the best method to remove items that would make the cells more suicide resistant. 
A couple weeks ago on pod 5C, there were five cells that had the table and chair combos 
removed. That’s the first process of trying to make those cells safer for our inmates. Number 
two. Material to fill the gap in the cell wall has been received. We have begun to caulking one of 
our pods and once that pod has been completed, then we will start painting the pod. Number 
three. An invitation for bid has been prepared to secure a vendor to cover the holes in the frame 
of the bunks in the facility. The fourth thing we’ve done is recommendation #7. Enhance policy. 
The following policies have been completed and are in the process of being reviewed and 
approved for publication by administration. The mental health program and service policy, The 
medical housing level of care policy, Communication on patient health needs. The fifth thing 
we’ve done is recommendation #8. The problem list. The functionality of the problem list has 
been reviewed by the medical director and the providers. The business analyst met with the 
EHR vendor to explore methods to track the use of the problem list. The vendor will review and 
determine the feasibility of tracking this electronically. Recommendation #10. Staffing. A director 
of nursing has been hired and she began her orientation on July 27th, 2020. The current health 
care staffing grid is submitted to the board monthly for your review. Recommendation #11. 
Therapeutic programming on the mental health unit is limited. Discussions related to how 
inmates’ tablets can be utilized for therapeutic programming have begun. Recommendation 
#12. Treatment plans for suicidal inmates do not meet NCCAC standards. Treatment plans for 
suicidal inmates are being completed timely. That’s all I have to report to the board right now as 
to what the ACJ has done since the last Jail Oversight Board meeting.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Does anyone have any questions for Warden Harper?  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I have one Judge Clark. Regarding the combo table and chair being remove from the cells. I 
didn’t remember reading that as a request in the report. So, I was just wondering, are you 
replacing them with something else? Is that why you removed them? Why are we just having 
bare rooms?  
 
Warden Harper: 
We removed them because the NCCAC audit team indicated that, that could be used as a way 
for an inmate to hang themselves. So, that’s why we removed those items from those cells.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
So, they were only removed from cells on one pod? Were those ones in that pod different from 
the rest of the pods in the jail? Is that why just those ones?  
 
Warden Harper: 
We decided with those pods, that was indicated in the review about the mental health pod how 
we can make them more suicide resistant. So that’s why we decided to start with 5C and then 
we’re going to go to the other mental health pod to remove those chair and table combos.  
 

 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Have we considered any other options for what we can replace those with, so they have 
somewhere to sit and eat if they’re eating in their cells? 
 
Warden Harper:  
These individuals that will be assigned to these cells are acutely suicidal so the main thing that 
we’re concerned about is making sure they don’t harm themselves while they’re on the pod.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. So, they are not being replaced, they are just being removed? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Yes. 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. Thank you very much.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Any other questions for Warden Harper or any comments about the progress on the issues 
identified in the report?  
 
Brad Korinski: 
Warden Harper. Brad Korinski here. Good afternoon. I saw it come across my desk a couple 
days ago, a position transaction for a mental health specialist at the jail. Which seems to me, a 
very needed position and I applaud the jail for filling it or attempting to fill it. But, could you 
speak to what the duties of the mental health specialist will be or are, if it’s an existing position, 
and how that fits into the suicide prevention plan?  
 
Chief Williams: 
Mr. Korinski. If it’s ok with you I could probably answer this. Is that alright? 
 
Brad Korinski: 
Okay. Do you want to do it in the course of your presentation? 
 
Chief Williams: 
I can certainly add it to that when we talk about staffing if you would like me to do that? 
 
Brad Korinski: 
Sure. 
 
Chief Williams: 
Okay. I will hold off then. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Any other questions or comments? 
 
Judge Lazzara:  
Yes, just one last one. Ms. Williams is certainly aware. I am very concerned about trying to 
make sure we get some better programing, mental health programing into the jail. It sounds like 
it maybe through the use of tablets but if they’re not coming into play until maybe October, I was 

 
 
wondering if there is any way we could do something sooner than that. So that we could have 
some better mental health services offered in the jail. 
 
Chief Williams: 
Judge Lazzara, I will make sure to add that to my staffing portion as well. 
 
Judge Lazzara: 
Okay. Thank you. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Anything else? Alright, thank you. The next old business is an update on COVID-19. I don’t 
know whether Warden Harper or Deputy Warden Williams could you give us an update on that 
please? 
 
c. COVID-19 Update  
 
Chief Williams: 
I do want to acknowledge that the defense attorney was accurate. There was a lag in updating 
and that was my fault, on the jail website. I failed to provide those numbers. I thought I had done 
so. But they are accurate as of today. Prior to this meeting right around 3 O’clock, I did receive 
that we had 6 pending tests, we got 5 of those specimens returned to us as negative. So, those 
numbers will be updated and reflected at some point after this meeting this evening. One of the 
most important things though, is that we have zero positive inmate cases within the facility and 
the majority of our staff who have been impacted have returned fully recovered and restored to 
work.  
 
Warden Harper: 
I would like to add something to that your honor. I just want to add and say this to the men and 
women working at the Allegheny County. The men and women working at the Allegheny 
County, are doing a tremendous job in preventing the spread of this virus in our facility. If you 
read national news, or world news about what’s occurring in other jails in the United States, you 
will see that we are far more doing better than what everyone else is doing. So, I just want to 
commend everybody working at the ACJ on the outstanding work that they are doing to prevent 
the spread of this virus. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Thank you. Does anyone have any questions or comments for either Deputy Warden Williams 
or Warden Harper? 
 
Judge Lazzara: 
Yes. I understand that there is a policy that you aren’t going to test people as they leave the jail. 
However, as you all know a lot of my mental health court folks, they are going into other 
programs and a whole lot of these programs will not accept people into their program without a 
negative screening performed first. We all know we want to get people out of the jail. We want 
to move them into their programs. We want to get them the help that they need. And I would just 
ask that if it possible for the jail to more quickly allow there to be COVID test for people moving 
into programs, whether that be drug & alcohol programs that require it, mental health CRR’s that 
are requiring it, or other facilities. It would be greatly appreciated. Because having people have 
to sit there another couple of weeks at least to get a COIVD test is making it very difficult on 
folks.  
 

 
 
Chief Williams: 
So, Judge, I would like to respond to that if you’re open to it. When we had received the public 
comment in regard to testing everybody at the time of release. The interpretation was truly, as 
you know, somebody’s bond gets paid and it sounded like the request was that we would test 
that individual for COVID-19 and then release them. And that would definitely delay our process 
in being able to effectively and legally release someone within the time line that is designated. 
We have already been testing individuals for transfer to mental health placement like CRR or 
LPSR, because we do understand that they require those tests. So, we’ve done 168 tests either 
for a state correctional institution, torrent state hospital, CRR, nursing home, or other levels of 
care that require that. We’ve done so by working with those collaborative providers on 
identifying what their transfer date will be. We make sure we test the individual or at least offer 
to test, because we have had some of the persistently mentally ill refuse the test. Then we work 
with the treatment provider on insuring that we potentially quarantine that individual in a cell by 
themselves so that they can feel safer bringing them into their setting. So, we are in fact testing 
individuals, we are not delaying those mental health patients exiting our facility. We too, remain 
motivated in getting them to a more appropriate setting.  
 
Judge Lazzara: 
Awesome. Thank you so much. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Any other questions or comments? Ms. Hallam? 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Yes. I just have one more. I want to know what the jail is doing about the potential of false 
negatives in the test that have been conducted and come back negative. I read an article the 
other day saying that 15% of negative test have actually been proven to be positive but came up 
as a false negative. So, I just want to know what the jail is doing to address that? 
 
Chief Williams: 
So, we have under the recommendations of the Allegheny County Health Department, 
Pennsylvania Department of Health, and the CDC, treated everybody who is tested, on a 
quarantine status. The recommendation is that even when someone test negative for COVID-
19, especially if you’re using extensive based approach, there is a reason why you tested them 
to begin with. The recommendation is that you continue to monitor them to see if any additional 
symptoms develop. If additional symptoms develop, there’s typically a recommendation for a re-
test. We have not had individuals so far who have met that criteria. But they do remain on a 
medical isolation period until we have their test results and then on a quarantine period for the 
full duration of 14-days. I think we discussed this last month how that can be counter intuitive, 
it’s actually a shorter isolation quarantine period when your positive because the symptoms can 
develop all the way up to day 12 if you do have a negative test initially. I know that was a lot of 
information. I’m not sure if that answered your question correctly.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
No, I think it did. I think my biggest concern is that only the folks who have fevers are getting 
tested it seems.  
 
Chief Williams: 
That’s not accurate.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 

 
 
Okay. So, you cannot have a fever and still receive a test? Like, if you lost your sense of smell 
or something along those lines? You would still receive a test? 
 
Chief Williams: 
What I think was originally reported was early on in the pandemic, there were three symptoms 
and I believe we discussed last month. It was a fever, which is typically recognized at 100.4 
degrees, but with the support of the Allegheny County Health Department, we reduced that 
threshold to 99.0 degrees, that would allow us to test more individuals. Shortness of breath and 
a newly developed onset of cough. So, initially in the first, I would say month or month and a 
half of the pandemic, those were the symptoms that we were testing for. When the CDC 
expanded the criteria, we too expanded our criteria and modeled the symptoms that they had 
offered including loss of smell and loss of taste. We’ve had more frequently than not, individuals 
not present with a fever but we still test them. We’re seeing still a lot of respiratory conditions 
that are the ones that are driving the test. So, a new onset of cough, tends to be the highest for 
testing in our facility.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Thank you. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Any other questions or comments? Alright. Thank you.  
 
3. Review of the Minutes for July 2, 2020 
 
Judge Clark: 
The minutes were sent out to you with all the other board information and so I hope you’ve had 
a chance to review them. I will entertain a motion to approve the minutes if it’s your pleasure.  
 
The Board unanimously approved a motion by Judge Lazzara, duly seconded by Bethany 
Hallam to approve the minutes from the July 2, 2020 Meeting 
 
 
Judge Clark: 
I did go while we were in the meeting and looked at the posted minutes to see about the public 
comments. Initially, the comments that were read were included in the body of the minutes and 
the draft of the minutes that you received included the questions and comments with the 
responses. So, for the person that had that concern, they will be posted on the website with the 
minutes. 
 
4. President’s Report 
 
Judge Clark: 
 Alright, so Warden I don’t have anything additional to report to the board today, so we’ll skip 
down to the Warden’s report.   
 
5. Warden’s Report 
 
Judge Clark: 
Warden Harper is there anything additional? Well I know you have quite a few things to report 
so we’ll skip to you at this time. 
 

 
 
Warden Harper: 
Yes ma’am. Thank you very much. I just want to report to the board that all inmates at the 
Allegheny County jail was given the $50 from the inmate welfare fund. The tablet update. We’re 
still on track to meet the obligations to have the tablets implemented by the first of October. 
Since the last meeting we began transferring inmates to our alternative housing provider. I want 
to inform the board about the operations committee, I don’t know if all the board members know 
about the operations committee. Before the Chief and I bring any expenditures to the jail 
oversight board we have to get it approved through the operations committee. The operations 
committee consists of people from the courts, pre-trial services, DHS, the jail, etc. So, any 
expenditures we have to get it approved by the operations committee before we can bring the 
expenditures to the jail oversight board. I just wanted to make sure that the board members 
knew about the operations committee. The last thing that I want to talk about is that there’s been 
a lot of communication about mask being worn at the Allegheny County jail. I just want to inform 
the board that I put out an email that mask with writing and logos on them will not be authorized 
in the jail for all employees, volunteers, contractors, anybody coming to our jail cannot have any 
writing or logos on their mask. And that’s just not with the mask we have that in our policy with 
the shirts etc. We work in a professional environment and we should not be wearing 
inappropriate writing and stuff on the mask, shirts, etc., while working in a professional 
environment. Your honor that’s all I have.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Any questions or comments for the Warden? 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I have just two. The first one is regarding the mask policy. Now when you say logos, does that 
mean that they have to wear a plain solid color mask? That’s the only thing acceptable or could 
you clarify what a logo is? In regard to the policy.  
 
Warden Harper: 
We directed a plain solid colored mask. Because it is too subjective and difficult to police.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
So, any sort of multi-color mask even without writing is not acceptable either?  
 
Warden Harper: 
We directed a plain solid colored mask.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Got it. And my second question is about the $50 that we put on the commissary accounts of 
each inmate. You said they received it last month. I’ve gotten some reports from folks who are 
either in solitary or they technically owe the jail money or folks who are just on administrative 
restrictions not being able to purchase commissary. I just want to clarify, did those people still 
receive the $50 and are just not able to spend it or could you speak to that? 
 
Warden Harper: 
First, I want to correct the solitary confinement, we do not have solitary at the Allegheny County 
jail. We segregate the individual from the general population. So, the funds were given to the 
inmates in accordance to our policy.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 

 
 
Okay. So, every single person regardless if they are in RHU, regardless if they are on 
administrative restrictions for purchasing commissary or phone calls, regardless if they owe the 
jail money for whatever reason, every single person received the $50? 
 
Warden Harper: 
I want to say this. If an individual has damaged county property and owes the county money, we 
did take half of that from the individual to pay for the damage to county property. And I felt that, 
that was right. We didn’t take all the money we’ve taken half the money and that’s been done for 
years before I even got here.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. And the people that are in RHU or are on commissary restrictions, did they still receive 
the full $50?  
 
Warden Harper: 
They received the money on their account but if they have commissary restrictions, they will not 
be able to use it to order commissary. 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. Thank you for clarifying that.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Any other questions or comments?  
 
Brad Korinski: 
Excuse me Warden. Brief comment in perhaps for another meeting. If you could have the 
vendor for the tablets speak at an upcoming meeting and explain to the board and the public 
what is available on the tablets, what’s not available, the cost structure, because the tablets are 
very anticipated event. We get a lot of questions on them and I think it would be useful to have 
some material and some information on what their experience will be. 
 
Warden Harper: 
What I would recommend is that we could present everything that you just requested. If the 
board has particular questions of us about the new telephone contract, if the board members 
could just submit us the questions, we could do a presentation next month pertaining to your 
request.  
 
Brad Korinski: 
And I wouldn’t mind getting my hands on the tablets too if you could send one down to room 
104.  
 
Warden Harper: 
And of course, Mr. Korinski, we don’t have a tablet right now. We’re in the process of trying to 
get everything done so we can get the tablets implemented by October.  
 
Judge Clark: 
I was originally thinking that maybe we would be meeting in person and we could have a 
demonstration, but I don’t think that’s going to happen. We still might be able to have some type 
of demonstration at the time that they get the tablets, to see it, but it would be nice to see how 
they work and what they are like. So, obviously in person is the better way but maybe that can 

 
 
happen once they get them and at the October meeting, we can see it and have a little 
demonstration that would be nice I think Warden.  
 
Warden Harper: 
We will make that happen your honor.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Anything else? 
 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I have one question that I forgot to ask. If I may your honor? It has come to my attention from 
the last board meeting. I know we talked a lot about the transgender housing policy in the jail. 
But something that was brought to my attention over the past few weeks is that the way the 
transgender folks are being classified in the jail system, they are still being misgendered. Can 
you speak to that and how we can address that, how we can change that to make sure that 
people are properly gendered when they are booked in the jail?  
 
Warden Harper: 
The process is that every individual that identifies different than their birth, they’re presented to 
the jail committee and that committee makes the recommendation as to where the individual will 
be housed. Of course, we have input from the individuals as to where they would like to be 
housed and they’re also evaluated by psychiatrist, mental health, the PRIA coordinator, etc. All 
of that information is brought before this committee to make the decision as to where the 
individual will be housed.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I understand that part. I know you’ve spoken to that before. But I’m specifically talking about, 
here I can give an example, ‘A trans-women was booked in the Allegheny County jail over the 
past month. And she was listed as a male, with her name, and her identifying information but 
the gender was listed as male.’ I understand that there is a committee that the person goes 
through but I’m more concerned about from the moment that they enter the doors of the jail prior 
to seeing the committee, where they are housed at intake and how they are recorded as to their 
gender because I’m getting this wasn’t the first report of someone being misgendered.  
 
Warden Harper: 
Ms. Hallam. When an individual is first brought to our facility, we make our decision based on 
their legal gender.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. And what determines their legal gender in your eyes? 
 
Warden Harper: 
The documentation that comes in when the individual is committed to our facility. 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay and what is that documentation just to be clear? 
 
Warden Harper: 
The criminal complaint. The police report.  
 

 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay so if someone is misgendered on the police report, they’re going to be misgendered in the 
jail? 
 
Warden Harper: 
We go by whatever is on the document that’s presented to us from the law enforcement agency.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. Is there a way we could change that? Judge Clark, maybe you could speak to the 
possibility of what the jail oversight could do. 
 
Judge Clark: 
I would say this, it’s something that we should certainly look at. There’s a couple of things that 
I’m thinking in my mind. 1. We could probably turn to DHS because they could provide us with 
some guidance about what is the appropriate and respectful way to identify gender. I think one 
of the things I would want to know is what other correction facilities are doing with regard to that, 
including our state correctional system. But I think it’s an area in which we could all benefit from 
some training because I think there’s other issues and I know that in the past I’ve gotten letters 
from transgender inmates or former inmates concerning even just the way they are addressed 
by the corrections officers. I think that, that is an area in which we clearly need to look at 
providing some better practices and training for the jail staff. So, I think going forward that’s 
something that we could look at and I’ll talk to the Warden and Deputy Warden about that and 
maybe touch base with DHS. I know that they do some work around that and I can say that as a 
judge, our dependency cases where we have transgender children in foster care, I mean they 
have done some great work in making the foster care experience better. But there’s still a lot of 
issues even for transgender juveniles who have to go to placement. It’s a very complicated 
issue and a lot of work needs to be done here in Allegheny County, in Pennsylvania, and 
nationally as well. So, I think it’s something that we should look at, maybe we can set the 
standard and be the goal standard for the rest of the world. That’s something that we could 
aspire to be. I think it’s something that we should look at going forward.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Thank you, Judge Clark. I really appreciate that and if possible, we could maybe meet in the 
mean time prior to the next jail oversight board meeting and get it on the agenda for the next 
meeting, a new policy for that. A big concern of mine is I’ve heard many instances of police 
intentionally misgendering trans folks whenever they’re arresting them and so if the jail is doing 
what they are saying and using the police report to determine and decide how someone will be 
classified in the jail in regard to their gender that just brings up a lot of issues. I agree that we 
should do our best to lead the way and fix it.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Thank you. Anything else?  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I’m sorry. One last thing. it’s not really a question. A few months ago, we had asked for all of the 
policies and procedures of the jail to be sent to the jail oversight board, if my colleagues 
remember that? I want to say it was either February or March. We had asked for it to happen at 
the next jail oversight board meeting, but the Warden had indicated that, that was too short of a 
time. It is now the beginning of August and so I think it’s important to know how we can conduct 
oversight without knowing the policies. I just wanted to know if there was an update on that if 
September is not to soon? If that’s something that could be provided to us by the next meeting.  

 
 
 
Judge Clark: 
Warden? 
 
Warden Harper: 
I think what we agreed to was to put the policies that we think would not jeopardize the safety of 
ACJ on the website. As everybody knows, we’ve been constantly fighting the spread of COVID 
in our jail. So, I will look at this again to see if we could post these on the website as quickly as 
we can. But right now, my primary responsibility is stopping the spread of this virus in the 
Allegheny County jail.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
And I think we also mentioned that some sort of executive session where members of the jail 
oversight board could be aware of all of the policies. I understand that some for safety reasons 
as you sighted, could not be posted publicly for public consumption. But if the members of the 
jail oversight board could be aware of that information, it would be very helpful in our oversight 
duties.  
 
Judge Clark: 
We could look at that. It may take some redacting of certain policies as well, I think it’s a good 
place to start with those. I think that posting them is great too because the public has the right to 
know that as well. I’m glad you mentioned the policy because, I just sent an email to the board 
about this but, I think I would like the Warden to kind of announce that he was reviewing jail 
policy and discovered that there was no policy against choke hold in the county jail. So, Warden 
can you tell us what has been done about that when you discovered that? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Once we discovered that we put out a direct that the use of choke hold is not authorized at the 
Allegheny County jail. 
 
Judge Clark: 
I was pleased to hear that he just discovered that along the way and took some action to do 
that. Me and the board members were informed but I just wanted that to be a part of the minutes 
of this meeting. Thank you. Deputy Warden Williams? 
 
6. Deputy Warden’s Report 
 
Chief Williams: 
Yes ma’am. So, for the health care portion, or the Deputy Warden portion. I wanted to bring 
everybody up to date because we have been climbing in the pre-screens at booking as 
everybody has been aware. And we had 11 pregnant females come in during this last 
monitoring period. As of today, we have zero pregnant women currently in the facility. We’ve 
been coming up with very creative solutions constantly to ensure that we can provide 
confidential services to meet the needs of the patients within the facility. Dental has been doing 
an incredible job of getting on those housing units to do those initial intake assessments and 
seeing whether or not this is something that meets urgent or emergent criteria for dental work. 
The dental suite is still following the ADA recommendations, so we are not able to be full 
capacity yet because of COVID-19. But when those restrictions are lifted, we will be seeing a 
huge expansion in those appointments as well. As far as staffing goes, I know that, that has 
been a large concern in the public comments as well as this jail oversight board has brought up 
in a number of different meetings. There are some updates that you can see have already 

 
 
changed, we on boarded a new director of nursing to the facility. So, we have filled another 
leadership role at our facility. We’ve been very excited to have her on board. She is in her 2nd 
week. She actually worked in this facility before and she has over seven years in correctional 
experience, so she comes with a variation of experiences from outside entities and is able to 
offer a new perspective to the facility here as we are continuing to battle all of the different 
challenges of the current status and climate of this infection. We also, not reflected in the 
numbers, but something that’s been a large topic of conversation, started a full-time psychiatrist. 
An actual MD, I know that has been requested on a number of different meetings. We have had 
psychiatric providers at the physician’s assistant and CRNP levels who have been working very 
diligently to ensure the needs of the patients are met. And then we have had EHN support with 
some physicians who have done some moonlighting for second opinions and things like that for 
us. We’ve started this week, it’s not reflected in the staffing grid because he hadn’t officially 
begun prior to me sending this update. So, he is here and we’re really excited to have him on 
board. If I can, I will branch off into what Judge Lazzara was talking about. We’re going to be 
restructuring some of the ways that we handle mental health care in the Allegheny County jail. 
We are very excited with the team of providers that we currently have so that we can designate 
specialty populations to each of them. This will support continuity of care, it will also support us 
when we are expanding our group programs on the housing unit. That the mental health 
specialist that work very closely with the psychiatric providers will be able to directly consult as 
you would in an inpatient setting or even out patient care to make sure that patients are not 
decompensating, that they’re working on individualize specific treatment goals and that they are 
able to make demonstrated progress so that they can transition successfully into the 
community. So, we have been actively interviewing to fill some of those positions to include 
mental health specialist and we’ll actually be on boarding we believe two. We have a confirmed 
set date for one but two mental health specialists in the very near future which will allow us to 
expand some of those group services. They will still have to be done very creatively because of 
social distancing requirements, but on the units, we are going to begin those, the populations 
are smaller to begin with so it will not impact out of cell time for other populations who do not 
necessarily meet that group criteria. Additionally, not reflected in the staffing analysis because 
they have not started yet, but they are very excited to. We will be on boarding a health 
administrator next week. So, there is a lot of transition and change, it has been very difficult to 
on board new staff because numbers, fear, and COVID-19 have challenged us in the facility and 
many other places in ways that we never dreamed would happen. But we are very excited about 
the team that we have had throughout this entire crisis, and that we’re continuing to build and 
look forward to. I will be so excited to introduce these individuals in future meetings once they 
get a little more grounded and their foundation settled. Then, begin to talk about the incredible 
programs that they will implement and initiate in this facility.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Does anyone have ant questions for Deputy Warden Williams? I do. I have one. Deputy 
Warden, can you tell us about transfers to Torrent? Has there been any recently and how many 
are waiting for a bed at Torrent?  
 
Chief Williams:  
So, we did send within this last monitoring period, 13 individuals to Torrent State Hospital. And 
I’m awaiting to hear and make sure that the commitment numbers are right, but we are under 10 
right now, who are currently awaiting transfer. Torrent has been working very closely with us to 
make sure we’re cutting down on the timeline. There was a period where they really weren’t 
taking anybody due to their environmental limitations with disease spread mitigation. But we’ve 
been working very closely with them. We’ve had some individuals return to us and restore the 

 
 
competencies so that they can continue their legal process. And we’re continuing to send those 
individuals when it seems appropriate to do so.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Thank you. Does anyone else have any questions for Deputy Warden Williams?  
 
Brad Korinski: 
Your honor, I have my question previously on the mental health specialist, that may have got 
lost in the shuffle.   
 
 
Judge Clark: 
Can you repeat your specific question? 
 
Brad Korinski: 
It was directed to the Warden on the new position that I saw of a mental health specialist. 
 
Judge Clark: 
You wanted to know about the duties? 
 
Brad Korinski: 
Yes. The deputy said she would answer it in her presentation.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Deputy Warden Williams, can you talk about the duties of the mental health specialist? 
 
Chief Williams: 
Yes, I did mention that we are going to be on boarding one definitely and one tentatively, we 
don’t have a start date for that individual. But you’re correct, I failed to provide the duties. So, 
mental health specialist are typically at the masters level of education in either social work, 
counseling psychology, or a field or experience similar in nature. Our mental health specialist 
are very versatile and the populations that they work with some of them have stronger 
foundations with individuals with psychotic spectrum disorder. While, others have more 
experience with those that might have substance use disorders. Our mental health specialist 
work in many different areas in the facility so they assist in intake. One of the changes that we 
made three years ago was that we started doing mental health screenings on every single new 
booking in the facility. We used to only screen individuals when there was a referral or an 
indication that was made. But, as we recognize most people when they come into incarceration 
they are feeling stressed, this is a time of crisis and trauma for them so we want to make sure 
that we can support them and if they have any medication that need to be bridged or treatment 
needs, that we address those and get those identify at an early time. Our mental health 
specialist also assists on our acute and step down mental health units. They provide social 
service coordination and work very closely with the psychiatric providers. They interact 
frequently on an individual basis with those that are acutely mentally ill to ensure that their 
treatment is being cared for. Additionally, the mental health specialist does segregation rounds 
on our restricted housing unit. So, it’s very important to us that this specialty population gets the 
attention that it warrants because they could be high risk for decompensation because of their 
current status. We have our mental health specialist speak to the individual very frequently and 
follow up on any of their mental health treatment needs. Lastly, and I hope I’m not failing to talk 
about any of their other duties because I would feel badly. They’re very hard working. They 
assist with officers calls in the facility so there are times when somebody might have a court 

 
 
hearing that doesn’t go the way the way they anticipated, or a phone call or they recently 
learned of a family members passing, where they had typically been somebody who was stable 
in population and really needs to talk to somebody. Our mental health specialist are the first 
responders for those mental health needs and respond to the officers calls to make sure they 
are safe and stable and have adequate follow ups.  
 
Brad Korinski: 
Thank you. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Anymore questions? Thank you.  
 
7. New Business  
 
Judge Clark: 
So, now we have new business. We have two items that were submitted in advance to the 
meeting for new business and they both have been submitted by Councilwoman Hallam, so I 
will turn to her. She has two motions that I think she wishes to make at this time.  
 
New Business  
 a. Request for funds to be added to the commissary accounts of the 1,751 inmates, in 
the amount of $50 distributed from the Inmate Welfare Expense fund totaling $87,550. - 
Councilwoman Hallam 
  
Judge Clark:  
Do you want to make a specific motion? 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Yes please. I would like to move to put $50 on the commissary account of each individual 
incarcerated in the Allegheny County jail with the funds coming from the Inmate Welfare Fund.  
 
Judge Clark: 
And I believe at the time Ms. Hallam submitted the motion in writing that there were 1,751 
inmates and the total amount would be $87,550. Is there a second to the motion?  
 
The board unanimously approved a motion by Ms. Hallam, duly seconded by Sheriff 
Mullen to approve the placement of fifty dollars ($50) from the Prisoner Welfare Fund on 
the commissary fund for all current incarcerated persons at the Allegheny County Jail. 
 
 
Judge Clark: 
I would just ask, and I think certainly in the middle of a pandemic when the inmates are not 
having contact with family and need more phone contact and families aren’t able to necessarily 
get to the jail to put money on books. I think this is a wonderful idea. I would just ask that the 
subcommittee for the inmate welfare fund just kind of look long term. I did read the letter that too 
that Judge Lazzara alluded and there are maybe some recommendations that, that 
subcommittee might want to present and recommend including having a reserved fund. Many 
organizations where they have a fund, whether it’s a trust fund of some kind or a scholarship 
fund. You can spend so much of the interest each year or you have to keep so much in reserve 
so we want to make sure, in our efforts to make life better for the inmates right now in the 
pandemic, we want to make sure that we don’t use up, we don’t know how long this is going to 

 
 
last. I personally think we’re in it for the long hall, so I just think we need to look at it long term. 
But I do think that this is certainly a wonderful thing for the inmates right now in terms of this 
pandemic. Thank you, Ms. Hallam. Your second order of business.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Request for the JOB to support an initiative mandating a monthly report from ACJ 
administration to the JOB that details administrative punishments that incarcerated folks are 
receiving (I.e time in solitary/DHU, commissary or phone call restrictions, limited recreation time, 
etc.). No identifying information need be provided, but ideally this report would consist of the 
number of people receiving specific punishments, the length of those punishments (broken 
down by type), when/whether they received a misconduct hearing, and what they were accused 
of doing that warranted this restriction. “I believe this is necessary to keep track of whether or 
not punishments are being handed down justifiably or uniformly.” - Councilwoman Hallam 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
If anybody has any questions, I would love to answer them about the intentions of this. But 
otherwise I would move that the board approves this concept.  
  
Judge Clark: 
Alright so there’s a motion. Is there a second?  
 
Brad Korinski: 
I will second.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Ok so we have a motion and a second. Is there any discussion? 
 
Warden Harper: 
I would like to say something. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Yes, I was going to say I would like to hear from Warden Harper before we take a vote on it. 
Yes Warden? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Thank you, your honor. At this time, we are unable to provide the requested information without 
providing identifying information within such a report. Even if we were able to generate such a 
report without providing identifying information discipline is administered on a case by case 
basis. And due to the unique nature of each incident and the underlying issues concerning the 
inmate. Providing the report with this information used to make determinations regarding 
discipline would allow the board and the audience to use that information to identify inmates. 
What I’m saying is this, all the information that Ms. Hallam is requesting, anybody could look at 
this information and actually determine what inmate we’re talking about with the information that 
she’s requesting. And some additional facts, in June there were 246 misconducts that were 
written. Today we have 125 inmates that are segregated. So, this report would contain 

 
 
approximately 371 entries on this report. I just wanted to give you guys some information about 
that. We’re in the middle of a COVID-19 pandemic. We’re preparing to abate the NCCAC 
review. It’s just so much going on without giving us an additional responsibility by providing a 
chart with 371 entries possibly.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I have a question about that Judge Clark. I’m just wondering why it would give away who it is 
about. I mean, someone would have no idea if it didn’t disclose what pod it happened from, who 
the person was, or even the gender of the person who received the misconduct. So, how would 
it be that folks would be able to read this report and know who it was talking about? 
 
Warden Harper: 
I would love to have this conversation offline and I can actually tell you how it could be done. 
But I don’t feel that it is appropriate to do it in this setting Ms. Hallam. 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I think that with the information you just mentioned about the misconduct and the number of 
those and the number of people who are segregated, the number of people who are receiving 
restriction on things like commissary, no phone calls. That’s information that this board never 
heard before. I think it would be very useful for us to receive on a monthly basis.  
 
Judge Clark: 
So, I think one of the things that the Warden is saying, just hearing that there is X amount of 
misconducts and then X amount of inmates in some type of restricted housing. Without knowing 
the details, which are the identifying factors. How would this information be useful to me? It just 
tells me a number and it doesn’t tell me anything more. I think in order for me to determine 
whether or not the discipline was appropriate in light of whatever happened I would have to 
know the details of what happened. And that’s hard to do without identifying, potentially who the 
inmate is. It would take a lot of work. In fact, I think what I would like to see happen, I feel at this 
particular time just that information would not provide the board with anything. Maybe there 
needs to be discussions about what it is that you want to accomplish from getting any of this 
information. Then, figure out what information you need to make that determination. Some of it 
might be the policy and some of these policies might be ones that the Warden can post or that 
the board can have. Even if we can’t post them on the public website it might be something that 
the board can have in terms of this particular type of infraction or misconduct, this is the general 
discipline. These are the disciplines that would land someone into a restrictive housing unit. I 
think that would be a good place to start, to figure out what are the general policies in the ACJ 
with regard to discipline. And then maybe at some point to determine what data or information 
you would want. But that’s just my suggestion.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Something I’m very interested in is seeing if any racial disparities especially. I want to see that 
the same punishment is uniformly being applied no matter who the person is for the same 
offense. I also want to see as mentioned in the little blurb in the agenda, is if folks receive the 
misconduct hearing if there were any sort of hearing process for the things that they were 
accused of. I really think that it is, again, our duty to provide oversight of the jail and without 
knowing of any of the administrative punishments, what they are, how many people are on 
those administrative punishments at any giving time. I think it makes it very difficult for us to do 
oversight over those things.  
 
Judge Lazzara: 

 
 
I’d have to agree with Judge Clark. I think it’s really difficult. “So, two people stole and apple and 
you may discover that their punishments are not the same and they may not be the same 
because person A may have stolen five apples in the past and person B may have not.” The 
only way we are ever going to find that out is if we are given information that ultimately leads to 
their identity. I think that we need to more fully formulate what you want, in a way that we can 
protect and preserve their identities, while still getting the information. And the way it’s framed, I 
simply find it to be not helpful at this point.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. What if the information was provided to us in an executive session? Would that make you 
all more comfortable? 
 
Judge Clark: 
I don’t know that I can answer that right now. I think that’s something that needs some thought 
about how that information would be reported. I was just thinking about Judge Lazzara’s 
example with the apple because maybe someone threw the apple at somebody and hit 
someone which would obviously not just be stealing an apple it would also be stealing an apple 
and then assaulting someone with it. I personally think we need too start with what are the 
policies and how are they applied? Of course, myself as a person of color I’m always looking at 
any issues of disparity and I think that’s something that the board should be concerned about 
and the jail should be concerned about. But I think we’re not there yet with this. I think we need 
to figure out what are the policies and how are they to be applied in the jail and then kind of go 
from there. That’s just my opinion.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Is that something we could create a subcommittee to discuss further, oppose to just doing this 
tonight? Is that something that we could create, is a subcommittee to address these sorts of 
things? 
 
Judge Clark: 
We could if you wanted to do that. What I would propse is, first let me ask the Warden. Is any 
information on the disciplinary policies? Could the board receive that information Warden? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Your honor. Some of that information would be redditive ma’am. 
 
Judge Clark: 
But we could receive some information on just the general policies in terms of discipline? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Yes ma’am.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
And also, those numbers that he mentioned, about how many people were on each restriction. I 
think that would be very helpful to us as well. Even just a number of how many people are on 
each sort of restriction.  
 
Chief Williams: 
Ms. Hallam. Numbers can be very deceiving, and I think you know this because you’ve done 
quite a bit of research into a number of different things and they can be skewed and 
misrepresented. So, I think it would be good to maybe start with the education of the process 

 
 
and the reasons why people might be written up and what is the difference between an informal 
resolution and a misconduct. Then the numbers would maybe make sense. 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Okay. So, I guess I’m kind of misunderstanding. So, just to say for example, there’s 200 people 
who are not allowed to purchase commissary right now. There’s 100 people who are not 
allowed to make phone calls. There’s 50 people in DHU. That’s not numbers that we could get? 
 
Judge Clark: 
I’m sure it’s numbers we could get but it would be meaningless without knowing the 
background. I think I heard Ms. Parees. 
 
Barbara Parees: 
Yes. I wanted to say, I spent a little bit of time this afternoon, I understand Bethany your desire 
to try to identify or not whether the punishments are justified and fair and that’s a worthy thing to 
know but when I started making a little chart of my own, here’s the number of people who have 
restricted phone calls. Here’s the number of people who have restricted commissary. Limited 
recreation. The number of days. And I came to the same conclusion that, and why. We should 
know why. So, if ten people had restricted recreation for fighting but there were different number 
of days for that. I got a ten-day restriction and you got a five-day restriction. Then, I thought 
there’s a push and shove type of fighting and then there’s a fighting with intent to harm 
someone type of fighting. I really do think that the details are so important and I’m also sitting 
here thinking, I’m not a data person. But I think if we undertake something like this, we would 
need someone who can say what data really does impact. Whether it’s fair or justified. Think 
about the flu right now and you could jump to conclusions which we’ve all done, as to where 
you’re getting it. Is it family gathers? Is it at that pool party? Was it in the restaurant? And so, all 
of that is really good data but unless it’s organized and understood and applied for a purpose. I 
think that we would not be getting to where you’d want to get to. I would really not like a 
subcommittee to do it because I think the whole board needs to be educated about it first and I 
think that’s what Judge Lazzara and Judge Clark were beginning to say. Let’s get some 
education for us so if we do this, we do a good job of it.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Yes. I agree Ms. Parees. I actually do agree with you I would love to get the data, and have it 
analyzed. If I could actually pull my motion to make this report happen monthly and instead, we 
could schedule a meeting of the whole jail oversight board. Where we could get some education 
on this. I think that’s a great idea and I think that would be beneficial to all members on this 
board if that’s something that everyone would be open to.  
 
Judge Clark: 
Sure. I guess we can do that. We have to be careful how we meet outside the public. 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I thought about that after I said that. 
 
Judge Clark: 
Right. We can meet to be educated on issues that may come before the board. We can’t vote. 
And we really can’t have any discussion on it. So, we can meet. One of the things that we can 
all do is determine what is it that we want to know? For example, Ms. Hallam would like to know 
if there are any racial disparities and how discipline is made about in the jail. That’s certainly a 
worthy thing and so we could ask a data person what information do we need in order to figure 

 
 
this out? Or is there any information that could tell us that? In the interim, I guess what we could 
do is ask if we could get some information from the Warden redditive or otherwise. On what the 
sort of discipline policies are, and what the procedures are. For example, something I would like 
to know is if somebody receives a discipline in the jail what rights does the inmate have to 
challenge that or appeal that. Would things go to a hearing? I know that there are some things 
that get referred to the county police if there’s something that might constitute a crime. If an 
inmate is assaulted by another inmate or by a corrections officer, that might be referred to by 
the county police. There are other people that I get a lot of letters from inmates in the county jail 
which we try to write back and refer them to the right places. Those are more sort of formal 
things. So, how does it progress? I think that’s information we could receive, if someone gets a 
restriction or discipline or something. And then what’s the next step in that process? Do they 
have the right to appeal that? And if so, to whom and is there a right to any type of hearing in 
that and if so, how does that happen. I think that would be something to start with if we could get 
that information. And then I think the other thing that board members could do individually, is 
think about if you had any information about this, what is it that you would like to know? What 
are your specific questions and put a list together of those questions? Then talk to a data 
person. It could be our accounting data analyst, their department, to see if they could help us 
figure out what information we need to have. And then of course, we have to understand from 
the Warden, what are information are we allowed to have without identifying folks. So, I think 
there’s a lot of steps in this process, so I would ask that each of us thinks about what we want to 
know and if you could send that to me, I would appreciate that. Two, get in touch with the county 
data analyst to say; “Can we get this? Is there a way to know this information sort of easily from 
the data without the identifying factors?” Three, from the Warden what are right now, some of 
the general policies and procedures with regard to discipline in the Allegheny County jail. So, I 
think we can have those and then we can decide. If we can have that information, maybe by the 
next meeting, then maybe we can then decide where we want to go from there.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I agree with you 100%. I just do want to point out that there’s definitely value in statistics though. 
You know it’s 10% of the county jail is right now on some sort of administrative restriction. That 
in its self is useful data. So, if on top of the things that you just mentioned, if the Warden, again, 
just gave us numbers that we weren’t aware of before. So even something as simple as that, I 
agree while we cannot extrapolate all of the data we want to analyze from those numbers, I do 
think that, that’s a great start to just have an understanding. 
 
Judge Clark: 
That should be one of your requests “I want this, because I want to know that.” That certainly 
might be important. With respect to your motion, do you want to vote on the motion? There has 
been a motion and a second. Are you going to withdraw it at this time? 
  
Councilwoman Bethany Hallam withdraws motion of request for the JOB to support an 
initiative mandating a monthly report from ACJ administration to the JOB that details 
administrative punishments that incarcerated folks are receiving (I.e time in solitary/DHU, 
commissary or phone call restrictions, limited recreation time, etc.).   
  
Judge Clark: 
Thank you. Is there any other new business for the board at this time?  
 
8. Community Corrections Reports 
 
Judge Clark: 

 
 
Okay I think the community corrections reports are contained within the packet that you 
received. Does anyone have any questions about anything that’s in the community corrections 
report? (Refer to the August Warden’s Report) 
 
Judge Clark: 
Alright. So, if there’s no other business for the board at this time I would entertain a motion to 
adjourn. 
 
Sheriff Mullen: 
Motion to adjourn.   
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Judge Clark. Real quick before we adjourn and before you get a second. Could we request that 
a supervisor from the food service department is invited to the next meeting? So that we can 
discuss the food service audit that was conducted and be sure that the menu that was provided 
to us in our packet of information is actually the menu that is being served to the incarcerated 
folks? Can we invite somebody from the food service department next month? 
 
Judge Clark: 
Can we do that Warden? 
 
Warden Harper: 
We can see if Trinity will come your honor.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I’m sorry. I wasn’t looking for someone from Trinity. I was looking for someone who is employed 
by the jail who is serving the food in the jail. Preparing the trays. 
 
Warden Harper: 
That would be an inmate Ms. Hallam.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Are there any food service workers that are actually in the jail with the incarcerated folks who 
are preparing the meals? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Hold on. What was the question again Ms. Hallam? 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
I might be misunderstanding. Is there somebody from Trinity that’s actually in the kitchen 
helping prepare meals with the incarcerated folks. Like a kitchen worker? 
 
Warden Harper: 
Yes ma’am.  
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Oh okay. I’m sorry. That’s my bad. Can you see if one of them can come to our next meeting? 
 
Warden Harper: 
I will look and see if they can be here. Yes ma’am. 
 

 
 
Bethany Hallam: 
Thank you very much.  
 
9. Adjournment  
 
The Board approved a motion to adjourn the meeting at 5:30 pm by Judge Clark.  
 
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
 
Chelsa Wagner, Secretary